Header:
Keine Überschrift gefunden

Subheader:
Keine Unterüberschrift gefunden

Content:
Among the 242 galleries partaking in the 2025 edition of Art Basel Hong Kong, 23 newcomers will showcase a diverse array of not-to-be-missed artists from across the globe. Below, we highlight seven galleries from Brazil, Italy, France, Hong Kong, and the United States that are gearing up for their debut in March.

P420(Galleries sector, Italy)

Introducing contemporary audiences to forgotten avant-garde artists from the 1970s is the project of P420 co-founders Alessandro Pasotti and Fabrizio Padovani. Since establishing their Bologna gallery in 2010, they have revitalized the legacies of artists such as Irma Blank – whose text-based abstractions sought to draw language without words, transcending the limits of syntax and diction – and the vanguard photographer Franco Vaccari. Early on, in an effort to situate their artists within contemporary discourse, Pasotti and Padovani collaborated with emerging curators who introduced them to younger artists with similarly poetic sensibilities, such as Shafei Xia and Rodrigo Hernández. Today, the gallery supports an impressive roster of estates and artists through exhibitions, institutional partnerships, and monographs featuring texts by international scholars and curators.

Contemporary by Angela Li(Insights sector, Hong Kong)

Angela Li left her career in finance in 2001 to try her hand as an art consultant before opening her eponymous gallery in 2008. Li’s focus on emerging and mid-career artists based primarily in Hong Kong has served the Hollywood Road gallery well; her roster is among the most sought-after in the city. Recent standout shows include ‘Cabinet of Curiosities’, featuring Wong Sze Wai’s object-laden cityscapes and ‘moments in layered motion’, focusing on Cheung Tsz Hin’s luminous snapshots of everyday life. At Art Basel Hong Kong, Li will present a survey of renowned multidisciplinary artist Yuk-Keung Kurt Chan’s more than 50-year career.

Neon Parc(Insights sector, Australia)

An artist, curator, cofounder of the Spring 1883 art fair, and the force behind Neon Parc, Geoff Newton is out to reimagine the role of the art dealer. Across the gallery’s two Melbourne locations, Newton hosts a robust program of solo shows and ambitious curated exhibitions primarily featuring artists from Australia and New Zealand. Occasionally, he introduces international artists who are lesser known in the country, such as American sculptor and painterLynda Benglisand German multidisciplinary artistMartin Kippenberger. In Hong Kong, the gallery will showcase a suite of large-scale paintings by Diena Georgetti that reassemble the aesthetics and ideologies of 20th-century Modernism. Collaging together images, patterns, language, and ornamentation, her paintings ‘speak not only of their time but their borrowed history,’ says Newton.

Galerie Allen(Discoveries sector, France)

In 2013, Australian curator and publisher Joseph Allen Shea hosted an exhibition in artist Mel O’Callaghan’s street-front atelier in the Montmartre neighborhood of Paris. More than a decade later, he is still in Paris and still collaborating with O’Callaghan. Together, they opened Galerie Allen with an eclectic roster of artists that varies from the Pop Art nun SisterCorita Kent; the sculptor and key figure in Australia’s grunge scene Hany Armanious; and para-architect Laëtitia Badaut Haussmann. ‘Capitalizing on our varied experiences as a former curator/publisher and a practicing artist, we are able to create a platform where commerce is the structure of an entire ecology of support,’ says Allen Shea. For Art Basel Hong Kong, the gallery will present new works by Kirill Savchenkov, including ethereal sculptures and a floor lined with memory foam.

Berry Campbell(Galleries sector, United States)

When Christine Berry and Martha Campbell opened their New York City gallery, their intention was simply to showcase outstanding art, not necessarily to focus on female artists. Twelve years later, it turns out that the outstanding art happened to be by women, particularly postwar painters who were overlooked in their lifetimes. ‘With a combination of serious research, finely curated exhibitions, and a whole lot of tenacity, we have been able to build artist legacies,’ says Berry. The gallery’s exclusively American program includes Alice Baber, known for her luminous color fields; Lynne Drexler, who created technicolor, mosaic-like paintings; and Bernice Bing, celebrated for her spiritual abstractions. All three artists will be featured in the gallery’s forthcoming Hong Kong presentation.

Millan(Galleries and Kabinett sectors, Brazil)

Since its formation in 1986, Millan has remained dedicated to the presentation of Modern and contemporary art from Brazil. Keeping one eye on the past and the other firmly on the future is an ethos that informs all aspects of the gallery, from its stable of artists – which includes both preeminent visionaries such as the sculptor Tunga and emerging experimental artists such as Vivian Caccuri – to the location and architecture of its three São Paulo outposts. Case in point: their standout 2024 exhibition, ‘The Experimental Legacy’,placed groundbreaking 20th-century female artists such asMira Schendelin dialogue with contemporary artists who also draw and utilize paper, such as Guga Szabzon. In Hong Kong, the gallery will share a booth with fellow Brazilian stalwartAlmeida & Dale. As part of the Kabinett sector, Millan will also showcase soothing landscape paintings by Fran Chang, a young artist of Taiwanese descent.

Nicelle Beauchene Gallery(Galleries sector, United States)

Depending on when you visit Nicelle Beauchene’s eponymous gallery on the Lower East Side of Manhattan, you may find it on either the first or second floor of her Broome Street building thanks to an arrangement with fellow gallerist Jack Hanley, whereby they alternate exhibitions between the two spaces. A sense of playfulness and unconventionality belies her dynamic program, composed primarily of emerging and underrecognized artists. Despite divergent materials and processes, her artists trend toward a distinct aesthetic: vibrant, innovative, and irreverent. Among them are the Queer Black American photographer Elliott Jerome Brown Jr., multidisciplinary Libyan-Yurok artist Saif Azzuz, and the legendary Gee’s Bend Quiltmakers.

Art Basel Hong Kong 2024 will take place from March 28 – 30, 2025. Learn morehere.



Tara Anne Dalbow is a writer, curator, and critic living in Los Angeles. Her work has been featured inW Magazine,Bomb,Frieze,Artnews,Flaunt,Art Papers, and more.



Caption for top image: A visitor peeking through a hole of a work by Saif Azzuz, presented in the Meridians sector at Art Basel Miami Beach 2023 by Nicelle Beauchene Gallery.

Published on January 13, 2025.







‘When I paint buildings, I’m really painting my emotions,’ says the Shanghai-based painter











Lush landscapes, busy cityscapes, layered memories, and constant change brilliantly fuel the work of four painters in the Asian metropolis









How the work of painters such as Bonnard, Vuillard, and Vallotton continues to inspire many contemporary artists







